Add determinism developer documentation (#5718)
NVIDIA/Megatron-LM: docs/developer/determinism/README.md

---
orphan: true
---

# Determinism Developer Reference

> This reference is for Megatron developers and reviewers working on
> deterministic training. For setup instructions and supported configurations,
> use the [Deterministic Training user guide](../../user-guide/deterministic-training.md).
> This reference does not repeat it.

Bit-exact determinism means two runs with identical configuration, data, seeds,
software, and hardware produce identical results.

## Contents

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This reference includes:

```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

> - [`status.md`](./status.md): what deterministic mode enforces, how it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`status.md`](./status.md): deterministic-mode enforcement, validation,
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

>   validated, performance cost, and a pointer to the live roadmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  performance cost, and a pointer to the live roadmap
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

> - [`op-catalog.md`](./op-catalog.md): discusses operations with a deterministic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`op-catalog.md`](./op-catalog.md): operations with a deterministic code path,
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

>   code path and operations that deterministic mode does not support. The goal is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    operations that deterministic mode does not support, and the goal to shrink
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

>   to shrink the second bucket and make the first one fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the unsupported set while speeding up the supported set
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

> - [`glossary.md`](./glossary.md): definitions and abbreviations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`glossary.md`](./glossary.md): definitions and abbreviations
```

Author: Applied in 257e0ebf2.

---
orphan: true
---

# Determinism Developer Reference

> This reference is for Megatron developers and reviewers working on
> deterministic training. For setup instructions and supported configurations,

> > use the [Deterministic Training user guide](../../user-guide/deterministic-training.md).

Reviewer 2: Do you think we should fold ../../user-guide/deterministic-training.md to the current directory?

Author: Thanks. I would keep the setup guide under `docs/user-guide`: it serves users configuring deterministic training, while this directory is the developer contract and operation catalog. Keeping one user-facing source and linking it here avoids duplication and matches the existing docs taxonomy. I left the cross-link in place.

---
orphan: true
---

> # Determinism developer reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Determinism Developer Reference
```

> > **Audience:** Megatron developers and reviewers working on deterministic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>This reference is for Megatron developers and reviewers working on deterministic
```

> training. For setup instructions and supported configurations, use the

> > [Deterministic Training user guide](../../user-guide/deterministic-training.md) —

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Deterministic Training user guide](../../user-guide/deterministic-training.md).
```

> > this reference does not repeat it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This reference does not repeat it.
```

Bit-exact determinism means two runs with identical configuration, data, seeds,

> software, and hardware produce identical results. The precise definition and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
software, and hardware produce identical results. 
```

> the terms used across these pages are in the [glossary](./glossary.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Applied in a0a6d766b. I removed the redundant follow-on sentence so the definition stays concise.

## Contents

> 1. **[`status.md`](./status.md)** — where the effort stands: what deterministic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`status.md`](./status.md): what deterministic
```

>    mode enforces today, how it is validated, performance cost, and a pointer to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   mode enforces, how it is validated, performance cost, and a pointer to
```

   the live roadmap.

> 2. **[`op-catalog.md`](./op-catalog.md)** — the per-operation picture, in two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`op-catalog.md`](./op-catalog.md): discusses
```

>    buckets: operations with a deterministic code path, and operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   operations with a deterministic code path and operations that
```

>    deterministic mode does not support yet. The goal is to shrink the second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   deterministic mode does not support.
```

>    bucket and make the first one fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   
```

Reviewer: making future statements can become a legal problem that is super not fun to end up being part of

> 3. **[`glossary.md`](./glossary.md)** — definitions and abbreviations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`glossary.md`](./glossary.md)
```

> The roadmap itself is tracked dynamically in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The roadmap is tracked dynamically in
```

> [issue #5785](https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM/issues/5785) rather than in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[issue #5785](https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM/issues/5785).
```

Author: Applied in a0a6d766b. The roadmap text is now only the dynamic pointer to issue #5785.

> these documents, so the docs describe what is merged and the issue describes

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> what is moving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> implementation and debugging tools. It is not the setup guide for people
> launching training.
>
> Start with the [Deterministic Training user guide](../../user-guide/deterministic-training.md)
> for supported setup and constraints. These documents record conclusions, not
> raw run logs.

## Contents

1. **[`status.md`](./status.md)** — start here. Supported behavior, limitations,
   evidence policy, and the upstream state.
2. **[`training-path.md`](./training-path.md)** — a walk through the forward pass,
   backward pass, and optimizer that flags every point where determinism enters
   or is decided, with file:line refs and a ✔/◆/▲/✖ status for each (legend
   defined there).
3. **[`op-catalog.md`](./op-catalog.md)** — the per-operation catalog table
   (det? / det path / non-det path / how selected / evidence / perf Δ / gap), plus
   the perf hotspot priority list and the verification backlog.
4. **[`glossary.md`](./glossary.md)** — expansion of the parallelism and kernel
   abbreviations used by the developer references.
5. **[`validation-evidence.md`](./validation-evidence.md)** — findings,
   conclusions, limits, and the evidence standard.

> ## Audit source candidates for the operation catalog

Reviewer 2: `tools/determinism/audit_sensitive_ops.py` is it like a design of incoming tools for determinism debug? Maybe we can save this doc part when we land debugging tools.
